---
layout: modulespec

title: Aesthetics module specs

module-status: functional
---
<div id="module-spec-intro" markdown="1">

This module computes benefits related to the sensory enjoyment,
recreational potential and cultural values of the landscape.
Beneficiaries can be customized to
reflect specific constituencies, such as property owners or
tourists. Sink models are built for the area to
represent visual blight or obstacles to access.

</div>

<div id="module-spec-definitions" markdown="1">

## Definitions
---------------

### Viewshed

The benefit resulting from the viewing of beauty, such as mountains or
water bodies, is carried across line of sight and affected by the
amount of visual interruptions in between.

### Proximity to open space

The benefit resulting from access to nearby open space, such as parks
and golf courses is carried by short-range transportation and affected
by interruptions, such as traffic.

### Cultural identity

Some features of the landscape are important to determine the sense of
identity of local people. Beneficiaries of cultural identity tend to
value it very highly.

</div>

<div id="module-spec-specifications" markdown="1">

## Module specifications
--------------------------

### Case studies

1. Western Washington State
2. San Pedro River, Arizona

### Explanation

Aesthetic values are typically defined as the value derived from views
(Bourassa et al. 2004) or proximity to open space (McConnell and Walls
2005). These values often accrue to housing or property values and can
thus be measured using hedonic pricing. Homeowners typically gain some
combination of benefits through sensory enjoyment of views of nearby
open space, proximity to open space for recreation, or privacy.  Park
visitors (e.g., hikers) and drivers along scenic highways may also
value scenic views (Walsh et al. 1990). Spatial mapping of homeowners
is relatively straightforward, as housing units, open space, and
viewsheds have all been frequently analyzed in hedonic studies of
amenity values. However, the spatial flow characteristics of open
space proximity and viewsheds differ, with the value of proximity
declining with distance from the open space resource, while viewsheds
depend on an unimpeded line of sight to a visually significant object,
such as a mountain or water body.

In Western Washington, sources of aesthetically valuable views include
large mountains like Mount Rainier and water bodies such as Western
Washington or inland lakes. Users of aesthetic views are found in
residential areas. As a view travels from source to user, it may be
physically blocked by buildings, trees, or topography. Its quality may
be depleted by air pollution or visual blight, such as highways,
forest clearcuts, or visually unappealing land use types like
commercial, industrial, or transportation uses. Such sources of visual
blight can also be mapped. Higher concentrations of residential users
or visual blight lead to higher levels of ecosystem service use or
sinks, respectively.

### Model structure and assumptions

**Aesthetic proximity source value.** Aesthetic proximity depends
foremost on having open space in some form - forests, wetlands, beach,
riverfront, lakefront, golf courses, cemeteries, farmland, or
parks. We derived prior probability distributions for the
presence/absence of these features from a qualitative estimates of
LULC types in Western Washington, based on the 2001 National Land
Cover Dataset and local land use data. The intermediate variable
"OpenSpaceResource" aggregates these open space types, using a
NoisyMax node, based on the concept that the most highly valued land
use type will provide value (i.e., no synergistic effects). Values for
"high," "moderate," "low," and "none" indicate the likelihood of
higher or lower value that could be generated by each land cover type,
with the highest values for beach, parks, lakefront, and riverfront
(which frequently feature public access and open water), the lowest
values for farmland (known to provide disamenities like noise and
odors), cemeteries and golf courses (which may have limited public
access), and intermediate values for wetlands and forests. These
relative values could be adjusted for different parts of the world
based on local preferences and hedonic studies indicating relative
values of different types. McConnell and Walls (2005) provide a
comprehensive literature review of hedonic values for different types
of open space, but since studies are rarely easily comparable, they do
not provide a general ranking of the values of open space types.

Along with the type of open space, its quality matters in determining
value.  A series of papers from Maryland noted that homeowners are
sensitive as to whether land is permanently protected or may be
developed in the future (Irwin and Bockstael 2001, Irwin 2002,
Geoghegan 2002, Geoghegan et al. 2003). We assumed that 20% of the
landscape is protected, a prior probability that could be adjusted for
different urban areas. Troy and Grove (2008) found crime to reduce the
value of parks in urban areas and potentially in economically
distressed suburbs. We assumed that 20% of parks are located in urban
areas where crime may be problematic. Anderson and West (2002) found
park value to increase with size. We assumed that small parks are most
abundant, with the abundance of parks in a particular size class
declining as park size grows; we discretized park size by natural
breaks. Finally, poor water quality could reduce the value of open
space due to odors, public health concerns, or reduced recreational
opportunities. We assumed that 80% of open space has no open water,
and assume that equal areas meet water quality standards, are waters
of concern, or require a TMDL (indicating poor water quality). We
aggregated these four independent measures of open space quality into
a single intermediate variable, "Resource Quality," in order to
maintain tractability of conditional probability tables. We assumed
that the highest value will occur in large, formally protected open
space with no water quality problems or crime, and that the lowest
value will occur in small, unprotected parcels of open space with
crime and/or water quality problems. We thus peg the corners of the
conditional probability table for Resource Quality and fill in
intermediate values. We assume that changes to the discrete states of
each of these attributes cause relatively small changes in value, with
the exception of Formal Protection, since unprotected land is
potentially much less valuable for its open space quality.

Finally, we combined Open Space Resource and Resource Quality into a
single top node, "Proximity Source Value."; We note that high-quality,
high-value LULC types will produce the most amenity value and vice
versa, peg the corners, and interpolate intermediate values.

**Aesthetic proximity use.** For residential aesthetic proximity
value, housing must be near open space. The use model identifies
housing, its value, and the relative scarcity of open space (e.g.,
urban, suburban, or rural setting), Figure 3. Numerous authors have
noted that open space of various types is valuable in urban settings,
where user populations and scarcity are greater, and less valuable in
rural settings (including Brander et al. (2006),Boyer and Polasky
(2004), Doss and Taff (1996), Mahan et al. (2000), Reynolds and
Regalado (2002), Bin and Polasky (2005), and Schultz and Taff (2004)
for wetlands, and Anderson and West (2002) for parks). We assumed that
20% of the landscape has housing, that 10, 30, and 60% of the
landscape are in urban, suburban, and rural settings, respectively,
and that 75% housing values are most typically at moderate to low
levels, with 15% at very low levels and 10% at high or very high
levels. We discretized population density, a proxy for urbanization,
and housing value using natural breaks. These assumptions are for
Western Washington and could be adapted for other areas or more
empirically measured if desired. "AestheticProximityUse," the measure
of use, requires housing to be present in order to have value, with
value declining more quickly moving from urban to rural and less
quickly moving from high to lower classes of housing values.

**Aesthetic proximity sinks.** If ease of access, privacy, and quiet
associated with open space are the ultimate source of proximity value,
highways that prevent access or disturb aesthetic quality would act as
sinks.  We assume that major roads are present on 2.5% of the
landscape, and that in 90% of cases these roads will act as sinks.

**Aesthetic proximity flow.** Most studies have found proximity value
to decline with distance, as housing directly adjacent to open space
would be more highly valued than housing a short walk from open space,
which would be more valued than housing a long walk or drive from open
space. Most of the studies reviewed by McConnell and Walls (2005)
examined housing within a 0.5 to 1-mile radius of open space, and note
that open space-related amenity values drop rapidly past that
distance.  We thus represented aesthetic proximity value as distance
(either linear or through road networks) to open space that starts off
high near open space but drops off quickly moving farther away from
open space.

**Aesthetic view source value.** Mountains and open water are two
commonly valued natural objects in viewsheds, particularly for Western
Washington (Benson et al. 1998, Bourassa et al. 2004). As priors, we
estimated that 15% of the landscape is ocean, 2% is inland lakes, 5%
large mountains (> 2,750 m), and 10% small mountains (2,000-2,750 m;
these numbers are specific to Western Washington).  We aggregated
these values as "ViewSourceValue" in a conditional probability table
by noting that higher values were ascribed to ocean views, lowest
values were ascribed to mountain views, and intermediate values were
ascribed to lake views for the region (Benson et al. 1998, Bourassa et
al. 2004, Figure 4). Although skyline views may be valuable, we do not
include them in our analysis since skylines are man-made features and
thus do not provide an "ecosystem service."

Views in other regions should account for local preferences to the
degree possible as these preferences are unlikely to be uniform
everywhere (Bourassa et al. 2004).  For example, Steinitz et
al. (2003) provide an example of viewshed surveys for southeast
Arizona), based on the USFS (1995) framework.  Sander and Polasky
(2009) estimate value of proximity and viewsheds simultaneously for
the Ramsey County, MN.

**Aesthetic view use.** The use model for aesthetic views is quite
similar to that for proximity, with the exception that the
"UrbanProximity" node drops out. This is because views are potentially
equally valuable in urban, suburban, or rural settings. The use model
thus simply identifies housing and its value as determinants of
use. We assumed the same priors as for the aesthetic proximity use
model. The conditional probability table for "ViewUse" simply states
that in order to have value, housing must be present, and that the
added value is greater for higher-value housing.

**Aesthetic view sinks.** We assumed that either obstructions (e.g.,
buildings or vegetation) or undesirable visual features (blight)
directly obstruct or reduce the quality of views (Benson et al. 1998,
Bourassa et al. 2004, Gret-Regamey et al. 2008). Views of lost forest
cover, including clearcuts, could also act as a sink, reducing view
quality (Wundscher et al. 2008). We assumed that highways or other
major roads occupy 2.5% of the landscape, commercial, industrial, or
transportation land uses occupy 15%, and clearcuts occupy 2.5% of the
landscape for Western Washington.  In the absence of full LIDAR cover,
we also assume that 2.5% of the landscape may contain full
obstructions and 5% may contain partial obstructions. We aggregated
the types of "VisualBlight" using a NoisyMax node (assuming that the
greatest source of blight will override lesser sources of blight),
with clearcuts reducing view quality less than commercial, industrial,
or transportation land uses.  We combined VisualBlight and
Obstructions into an overall measure of ViewSink, where full
obstructions deplete 100% of views, partial obstructions and/or high
levels of blight deplete a greater degree of views, and no
obstructions and/or blight provide no or minimal view sinks.  We
"pegged the corners" with at the highest and lowest values and
interpolated intermediate probabilities in the conditional probability
table.

Although not currently included in the models, dust, air pollution, or
persistent cloudy or foggy conditions also reduce views, and could act
as sinks at variable temporal scales.

**Aesthetic view flow.** Flow is simply accounted for through a
line-of sight (ray casting) model (Johnson et al. 2010). Relative
quantities and qualities of views of desirable objects are projected
toward their viewers, as are views of undesirable landscape features.
Steinitz et al. (2003) note that for southeast Arizona, the view of
another residential property depletes view quality only within a
0.5-mile radius of the viewer's perspective (i.e., the effect drops
off relatively quickly).  Thus, we use a steep decay function to model
the effects of visual blight.

### Spatial data

|--------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------|
| Model                                | Layer                                         | Source                                                 | Resolution                                                   | Extent                                                                              |                                                     Year |
|--------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------|
| Viewshed source - Western Washington | Mountain                                      | National Elevation Dataset                             | 30 x 30 m                                                    | Western Washington                                                                  |                                                      n/a |
| <span />                             | Lake                                          | NLCD 2001                                              | 30 x 30 m                                                    | United States                                                                       |                                                     2001 |
| <span />                             | Ocean                                         | NLCD 2001                                              | 30 x 30 m                                                    | United States                                                                       |                                                     2001 |
|--------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------|
| Viewshed sink - Western Washington   | Highways                                      | Washington State Dept. of Transportation               | Vector line file                                             | Washing State                                                                       |                                                     2007 |
| <span />                             | Commercial-industrial-transportation land use | NLCD 1992                                              | 30 x 30 m                                                    | Western Washington                                                                  |                                                     1992 |
| <span />                             | Clearcuts                                     | Washington DNR                                         | Vector shapefile                                             | Washington State                                                                    |                                                     2006 |
| <span />                             | Obstructions                                  | Puget Sound LIDAR Consortium                           | 3 ft<sup>2</sup> & 6 ft<sup>2</sup> downsampled to 30 x 30 m | Parts of Western Washington                                                         |                                                2000-2006 |
|--------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------|
| Viewshed use - Western Washington    | Presence of housing                           | County assessors' offices                              | Vector shapefiles                                            | Clallam, Grays Harbor, Jefferson, King, Kitsap, Mason, Snohomish, Thurston Cos., WA | 2004 (Kitsap Co.), 2006 (King Co.); uncertain for others |
| <span />                             | Housing values                                | County assessors' offices                              | Vector shapefiles                                            | Grays Harbor, King, Kitsap, Mason, Snohomish, Thurston Cos., WA                     | 2004 (Kitsap Co.), 2006 (King Co.); uncertain for others |
| <span />                             | View use                                      | County assessors' offices                              | Vector shapefile                                             | King County, WA                                                                     |                                          2006 (King Co.) |
|--------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------|
| Proximity source - Puget Sound       | Beach                                         | Washington State Dept. of Health                       | Vector line file                                             | Washington State                                                                    |                                                     2006 |
| <span />                             | Emergent wetland                              | NLCD 2001                                              | 30 x 30 m                                                    | United States                                                                       |                                                     2001 |
| <span />                             | Farmland                                      | NLCD 2001                                              | 30 x 30 m                                                    | United States                                                                       |                                                     2001 |
| <span />                             | Forests                                       | NLCD 2001                                              | 30 x 30 m                                                    | United STates                                                                       |                                                     2001 |
| <span />                             | Lakefront                                     | Washington DNR (50 m buffer around lakes layer)        | Vector shapefile                                             | Washington State                                                                    |                                                      n/a |
| <span />                             | Park                                          | Federal, state, and county park layers combined        | Vector shapefile                                             | Western Washington                                                                  |                         Variable; generally 2000-present |
| <span />                             | Riverfront                                    | Washington DNR (100 m buffer around rivers layer)      | Vector shapefile                                             | Washington State                                                                    |                                                      n/a |
| <span />                             | Woody wetland                                 | NLCD 2001                                              | 30 x 30 m                                                    | United States                                                                       |                                                     2001 |
| <span />                             | Water quality                                 | Washington Dept. of Ecology                            | Vector Shapefile                                             | Washington State                                                                    |                                                     2004 |
| <span />                             | Area                                          | Calculated areas for above LULC types in Geoserver     | Vector shapefile                                             | Washington & parts of surrounding states                                            |                                                 Variable |
| <span />                             | Crime                                         | U.S. Census Bureau (urban boundaries)                  | Vector shapefile                                             | Washington State                                                                    |                                                     2006 |
| <span />                             | Formal protection                             | Federal, state, and county public land layers combined | Vector shapefile                                             | Washington State                                                                    |                         Variable; generally 2000-present |
|--------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------|
| Proximity sink - Puget Sound         | Highways                                      | Washington State Dept. of Transportation               | Vector line file                                             | Washington State                                                                    |                                                     2007 |
|--------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------|
| Proximity use - Puget Sound          | Urban proximity                               | Washington Dept. of Financial Management               | Vector shapefile                                             | Washington State                                                                    |                                                2000-2007 |
| <span />                             | Presence of housing                           | County assessors' offices                              | Vector shapefiles                                            | Clallam, Grays Harbor, Jefferson, King, Kitsap, Mason, Snohomish, Thurston Cos., WA | 2004 (Kitsap Co.), 2006 (King Co.); uncertain for others |
| <span />                             | Housing values                                | County assessors' offices                              | Vector shapefiles                                            | Grays Harbor, King, Kitsap, Mason, Snohomish, Thurston Cos., WA                     | 2004 (Kitsap Co.), 2006 (King Co.); uncertain for others |
|--------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------|

<div id="module-spec-references" markdown="1">

### References

Anderson, S.T. and S.E. West. 2002. The value of open space proximity
and size: City versus suburbs. Working paper: Macalester College,
Saint Paul, MN.

Benson E.D., et al. 1998. Pricing residential amenities: the value of
a view. Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 16: 55-73.

Bin, O. and Polasky, S. 2005.  Evidence on the amenity value of
wetlands in a rural setting. Journal of Agricultural and Applied
Economics 37 (3): 589-602.

Bourassa, S.C., et al. 2004.  What's in a view? Environment and
Planning A 36: 1427-1450.

Boyer T. and S. Polasky. 2004.  Valuing urban wetlands: A review of
non-market valuation studies. Wetlands 24 (4): 744-755.

Brander, L.M., et al. 2006. The empirics of wetland valuation: A
comprehensive summary and a meta-analysis of the literature.
Environmental and Resource Economics 33: 223-250.

Doss, C.R. and S.J. Taff. 1996.  The influence of wetland type and
wetland proximity on residential property values. Journal of
Agricultural and Reosurce Economics 21: 120-129.

Geoghegan, J. 2002. The value of open spaces in residential land
use. Land Use Policy 19: 91-98.

Geoghegan, J., et al. 2003.  Capitalization of open spaces into
housing values and the residential property tax revenue impacts of
agricultural easement programs. Agricultural and Resource Economics
Review 32 (1): 33-45.

<p>Gr&ecirc;t-Regamey, A., et al. 2008.  Linking GIS-based models to
value ecosystem services in an Alpine region. Journal of Environmental
Management 89: 197-208.</p>

Irwin, E.G. 2002. The effects of open space on residential property
values. Land Economics 78 (4): 465-480.

Irwin, E.G. and N.E. Bockstael.  2001. The problem of identifying land
use spillovers: Measuring the effects of open space on residential
property values. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 83 (3):
698-704.

Johnson, G.W. et al. 2010.  Service Path Attribution Networks (SPANs):
Spatially quantifying the flow of ecosystem services from landscapes
to people. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 6016: 238-253.

Mahan, B.L., et al. 2000. Valuing urban wetlands: A property price
approach. Land Economics 76: 100-113.

McConnell, V. and M. Walls. 2005.  The value of open space: Evidence
from studies of nonmarket benefits. Resources for the Future:
Washington, DC.

Reynolds, J.E. and A. Regalado.  2002. The effects of wetlands and
other factors on rural land values. Appraisal Journal 72: 182-190.

Sander, H.A. and S. Polasky.  2009. The value of views and open space:
Estimates from a hedonic pricing model for Ramsey County, Minnesota,
USA. Land Use Policy 26 (3): 837-845.

Schultz, S. and S.J. Taff. 2004.  Implicit prices of wetland easements
in areas of productive agriculture. Land Economics 80 (4): 501-512.

Steinitz, C., et al. 2003.  Alternative futures for changing
landscapes: The Upper San Pedro River Basin in Arizona and Sonora.
Island Press: Washington, DC.

Troy, A. and J.M. Grove. 2008.  Property values, parks, and crime: A
hedonic analysis in Baltimore, MD. Landscape and Urban Planning 87:
233-245.

U.S. Forest Service (USFS). 1995.  Landscape aesthetics: A handbook
for scenery management. USDA-Forest Service Agriculture Handbook
Number 701.

Walsh, R.G., et al. 1990. The Consumptive Value of Travel Time on
Recreation Trips. Journal of Travel Research 29 (1): 17-24.

</div>

</div>
