---
layout: module

title: Aesthetic views and open space proximity

module-specs-url: /modules/aesthspec.html
---
<div id="module-intro" markdown="1">

Sensory enjoyment provided by the landscape is crucial to human
well-being. ARIES supports the quantification of all these types of
aesthetic value.

</div>

<div id="module-at-a-glance" markdown="1">

### At a glance
----------------

**Scenic viewsheds:** The benefit resulting from viewing scenic
landscapes, such as mountains or water bodies, which is carried across
lines of sight and is affected by obstructions or visual blight in
between viewers and scenic objects.

**Open space proximity:** The benefit resulting from access to nearby
open space, such as parks, forests, wetlands, or beaches, which offers
privacy and access to open space.

</div>

<div id="module-in-the-field" markdown="1">

### In the field
-----------------

#### Viewsheds: Western Washington State

![](/images/seattle.jpg)
{: .left }

ARIES' viewshed analysis is being used to help planners understand the
consequences of development on property value through impacts on
aesthetic views. Aesthetic view values were computed and used to
determine property value. Views of mountains and water bodies provide
value to homeowners and municipal tax bases. City and regional land
use policies can either improve or degrade these values over time.

#### Open space proximity: Western Washington State

![](/images/EastWA.jpg)
{: .left }

ARIES' proximity analysis is being used to help planners understand
the consequences of development on property value through impacts on
aesthetic views and open space proximity.  Careful open space planning
can improve both property values and quality of life for residents.

#### Viewsheds: San Pedro River, Arizona

![](/images/6cgsan-pedro-leaves26a.jpg)
{: .left }

Viewsheds in the arid west are particularly valuable when they contain
views of green vegetation - forests, wetlands, riparian areas.  Views
are negatively impacted by large infrastructure development such as
transmission lines and mining projects.  Careful siting of such
infrastructure is thus important in order to maintain view quality in
the rural west. *Photo credit: R.Weller/Cochise College*.

#### Open space proximity: San Pedro River, Arizona

![](/images/san-pedro-leaves47a.jpg)
{: .left }

Proximity to riparian areas, water, and green vegetation is highly
valued in arid and semiarid environments.  With increasing stress on
the west's water resources, quantifying values like viewsheds,
proximity, and recreational potential is important in supporting sound
water management. *Photo credit: R.Weller/Cochise College*.

</div>
