---
layout: module

title: Carbon sequestration and storage

module-specs-url: /modules/carbonspecs.html
---
<div id="module-intro" markdown="1">

![](/images/774px-Smokestacks_3958.jpg)
{: .center }

Forests, grasslands, and other ecosystems store and remove carbon
dioxide (CO<sub>2</sub>) from the atmosphere and serve as natural
sinks for emissions that would otherwise contribute to global
warming. ARIES helps quantify and map: 1) carbon sequestration, the
removal of CO<sub>2</sub> from the atmosphere, 2) the potential
release of stored carbon in vegetation and soils through deforestation
or fire, 3) other CO<sub>2</sub> emissions from human activities.  By
mapping these processes, we can provide coarse-scale estimates of
regional carbon balance while enabling analysis of tradeoffs between
carbon sequestration and storage and other ecosystem services.

</div>

<div id="module-at-a-glance" markdown="1">

### At a glance
----------------

**Carbon sequestration and storage** by terrestrial ecosystems is the
net removal of CO<sub>2</sub> from the atmosphere, with carbon being
stored in vegetation or soils. CO<sub>2</sub> uptake occurs through
photosynthesis in all green plants. Terrestrial carbon sequestration
levels depend on factors including climate, vegetation type, soils,
and current and past land use practices.

**Stored carbon release** can occur when fire, land use change,
deforestation, or other vegetation and soil disturbances release the
carbon stored in vegetation and soils back to the atmosphere.  The
quantity of carbon released depends on the amount of carbon currently
stored in vegetation and soils and the type and extent of the
disturbance.

**Anthropogenic (human-caused) carbon emissions** result from the
burning of fossil fuels and the subsequent release of CO<sub>2</sub>
to the atmosphere.  Since greenhouse gas emitters benefit from the
waste absorption capacity of the biosphere, carbon sequestration and
storage can be divided among emitters.  Existing and proposed systems
to cap and assign property rights to atmospheric greenhouse gas
emissions use this framework.

**In other words:**

Carbon sequestration - Carbon release = Carbon emissions offset

**In summary**, by mapping levels of carbon sequestration, stored
carbon release, and anthropogenic emissions in a common unit (tonnes
C/yr), we can fully describe regional carbon balances - the level of a
region's net release or uptake of atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub>.  This
will become increasingly important as local, state, and national
governments continue to inventory greenhouse gas emissions and
implement strategies to address climate change.

</div>

<div id="module-in-the-field" markdown="1">

### In the field
-----------------

#### Madagascar

![](/images/lemur_160.gif)
{: .left }

ARIES is being used to help understand spatial patterns of carbon
sequestration and storage in vegetation and soils.  Accurate
assessments of ecosystem carbon balance are a critical component for
landowners interested in participation in emerging global carbon
markets. In developing world contexts like Madagascar, carbon markets
can potentially help finance conservation activities, if carefully
planned.

#### Puget Sound, Washington

![](/images/SnoquamieForest.jpg)
{: .left }

ARIES is being used to help planners understand tradeoffs between
carbon sequestration and storage and other ecosystem services, such as
timber harvests, flood control, and water supply in the Pacific
Northwest forests. Careful consideration of these tradeoffs will be
important as climate change policies continue to evolve.

#### San Pedro River, Arizona and Sonora, Mexico

![](/images/san_pedrokb2.JPG)
{: .left }

Carbon sequestration and storage estimates are increasingly demanded
by public and private land managers in the southwest and beyond.
ARIES' application to Southeast Arizona provided estimates of carbon
sequestration and storage on public and private lands in this semiarid
region.

#### West Coyote Hills, California

![](/images/CoyoteHillsCarbonUptake.jpg)
{: .left }

Carbon sequestration and storage were mapped for a key parcel of
undeveloped land in southern California.  Given the state's leadership
in carbon accounting, such assessments will become increasingly
important in managing conservation and development tradeoffs.

#### Vermont

![](/images/vt_forest.jpg)
{: .left }

Vermont's low population density and high forest cover make the state
a net sink for carbon emissions.  There is great interest among the
state's agricultural and forestry communities in developing
sustainable forestry and agricultural practices that increase carbon
sequestration and storage and other ecosystem services.  Tools like
ARIES can help map and quantify such ecosystem services tradeoffs.

</div>
