---
layout: module

title: Coastal flood regulation

module-specs-url: /modules/coastspecs.html
---
<div id="module-intro" markdown="1">

High-profile tropical storm and tsunami events including the Indian
Ocean tsunami in 2004 and Hurricane Katrina in 2005 spurred great
interest in understanding the role of coastal ecosystems in mitigating
storm surge damage.  In recent decades, population growth and coastal
migration have placed more people and property at risk of coastal
flooding, and have also damaged or caused outright loss of coastal
ecosystems capable of mitigating flood damage.  In addition, climate
change threatens to lead to sea level rise and an increased number and
size of tropical storms, which would further increase coastal flood
risk.  These intersecting drivers mean that valuing and managing
coastal ecosystem services is important today and will become even
more so in the future.

</div>

<div id="module-at-a-glance" markdown="1">

### At a glance
----------------

**Tropical storm and tsunami protection by coastal ecosystems:**
Spatial data and process models of tropical storm probability can help
quantify storm surges in ARIES.  ARIES then provides quantitative maps
of the specific areas in the ecosystems where wave and wind mitigation
occurs. Wave mitigation can be provided through engineered shoreline
protection or natural ecosystems. Coastal ecosystems providing wave
mitigation include mangroves, seagrasses, and coral reefs.  In our
models we assume that coastal regions with greater density, health,
and area of these ecosystem types would receive greater wave
protection than artificial coastal flood protection, and that the
combined effects of seagrass, coral, and mangrove ecosystems on
coastal protection are nonlinear. Tide levels and the slope of the
ocean floor are also important determinants of wave run-up or
mitigation.

**Beneficiaries of coastal flood protection:** As with other modules,
ARIES accounts for spatial flows when mapping provision of costal
flood protection, in order to distinguish between theoretical and
actual service provision. Theoretical wave sources, sinks (areas where
ecosystems dissipate wind and wave energy), and beneficiaries are
first mapped. These maps show the location of wind and wave origins,
areas capable of wave mitigation, and potentially vulnerable
populations.  Applying flow algorithms to these initial theoretical
states of wave sources, mitigation, and vulnerable lives or property
produces a clear quantification of the **amount of service benefit**
produced by different areas and actual recipients of **different
levels of the service**. By excluding sinks (areas of active wave
mitigation), ARIES can also quantify possible damages in the absence
of natural or artificial mitigation structures.

</div>

<div id="module-in-the-field" markdown="1">

### In the field
-----------------

#### Madagascar

<img src="/images/lemur_160.gif" />

Eastern Madagascar is highly susceptible to tropical storms coming off
the southern Indian Ocean. The island's coastal ecosystems include
dunes, coral reefs, seagrass, and mangroves, all of which play a role
in dissipating wind and wave energy generated by coastal storms.
Given Madagascar's high deforestation rates and the links between
sedimentation and coastal ecosystem health, modeling spatial flows of
these processes is important for understanding how to maintain the
services provided by coastal and marine ecosystems.

</div>
