---
layout: module

title: Subsistence fisheries

module-specs-url: /modules/fishspecs.html
---
<div id="module-intro" markdown="1">

![](/images/800px-Boat_in_Nosy_Komba_Madagascar.jpg)
{: .center title="By simone (IMG_0992) [CC-BY-SA-2.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons" }

Many rural communities around the world depend on fisheries as a key
protein source. Sustainable fisheries management requires an
understanding of the linkages between deforestation, erosion, sediment
and nutrient transport processes that take place on land and flow
through rivers but strongly affect coastal and marine environments.

</div>

<div id="module-at-a-glance" markdown="1">

### At a glance
----------------

**Subsistence fisheries:** Subsistence harvesting of ecosystem goods -
food, fuel, fiber, and other basic resources - is a critical
contributor to livelihoods in much of the developing world as well as
in parts of developed nations.  These ecosystem goods have been termed
the "GDP of the poor," since they provide employment and livelihoods
for so many of the world's poor while not being monetized as part of
traditional national economic accounts.  Societal dependence on
subsistence fisheries, combined with the recognition that the world's
oceans are in crisis due to overfishing, pollution, and climate change
strongly argues the case for more sustainable management of aquatic
and marine resources.  By mapping societal dependence on subsistence
fisheries, we can demonstrate direct linkages between ecosystems and
human well-being.

</div>

<div id="module-in-the-field" markdown="1">

### In the field
-----------------

#### Madagascar

![](/images/800px-Fishing_in_Downtown_Antananarivo.jpg)
{: .left title="By Chad Teer [CC-BY-2.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)], via Wikimedia Commons" }

Subsistence fisheries models for Madagascar rely on global spatial
datasets for fisheries, population density, and poverty, combined with
data on national fisheries use.  In Madagascar the species we modeled
subsistence use of three species: sky emperor (*Lethrinus mahsena)*,
slender emperor (*Lethrinus variegatus)*, and mangrove red snapper
(*Lutjanus argentimaculatus)*. Since underlying data are available for
all nations, it is feasible to extend coverage of the ARIES
subsistence fisheries model to other countries by simply accounting
for the degree of dependence on specific fish species for each nation.

</div>
