---
layout: module

title: Flood regulation

module-specs-url: /modules/floodspecs.html
---
<div id="module-intro" markdown="1">

Floods are complex events, difficult to predict and even more
difficult to protect against. Typically, a watershed's hydrology is
poorly understood; weather is notoriously difficult to forecast.
Using every tool of modern science, we cannot predict the next big
flood. Human land use and development, as well as climate change, are
transforming the "playing field" of flood protection. Decisions on
flood protection have generally been based on hydrological modeling
which provides a best guess at decade, 100, or 500 year flood
levels. The topography, vegetation, soils, hydrology, flood creating
rain events, impermeable surfaces, levees, dams, locations of farms,
residents, businesses, and public infrastructure are all important
factors in flooding, safety, and flood protection.

</div>

<div id="module-at-a-glance" markdown="1">

### At a glance
----------------

**Flood regulation and its beneficiaries:** ARIES maps sources of
floodwater as precipitation or snowmelt, "sinks" of floodwater as
areas that promote infiltration or detention of floodwater, and
beneficiaries of flood regulation as homeowners, farmers, or users of
public infrastructure within floodplains.  Flood mitigation can occur
via natural "green infrastructure" designed to promote natural
infiltration and dispersal of floodwater, or engineered "gray
infrastructure" such as dams, detention basins, and levees.  Flow
models show the areas that contribute floodwater to a specific area at
risk of flooding.  By comparing baseline conditions with scenarios to
manage green infrastructure (e.g., forest management, levee setbacks)
or gray infrastructure (constructing new flood control works), we can
compare alternative levels of ecosystem service provision against life
cycle costs of such investments.

**Event-based modeling:** ARIES currently models flood vulnerability
based on coarse-scale data (e.g., annual or monthly average
precipitation and snowmelt).  Collecting data to support event-based
modeling is difficult, as it requires fine-scale estimation of soil,
streamflow, and weather conditions.  We will seek to include existing
flood models and their outputs in next generation ARIES models,
increasing the accuracy and policy relevance of model outputs.  Even
in their current form, however, ARIES flood model outputs are useful
in comparing vulnerability and exploring tradeoffs between multiple
ecosystem services in alternative scenarios for flood management.

</div>

<div id="module-in-the-field" markdown="1">

### In the field
-----------------

#### Western Washington State

<img src="/images/chehalis.jpg" />

In May 2010, [Earth Economics](http://www.eartheconomics.org/)
completed a comprehensive Ecosystem Service and Flood Protection
Analysis for the Chehalis Basin in Washington State. Ecosystem
services, such as flood protection are concerned with the way natural
systems affect people. With this in mind, ARIES produces four types of
models, based on GIS and other data: 1) Beneficiary models; 2)
Provisioning models; 3) Sink models and 4) Flow models.

<p><a href="/case_studies/westernwa.html" class="learn-more"> </a></p>

#### West Coyote Hills, California

<img src="/images/CoyoteHillsCarbonUptake.jpg" />

ARIES was used to quantify flood protection throughout the San Gabriel
River/Coyote Creek watershed in northwestern Orange County,
California.  A higher-resolution analysis of flood regulation provided
by an undeveloped 600-acre site being considered for development was
also conducted.  Southern California is characterized by its flash
flood system due to the runoff-prone topography, climate, and highly
urbanized land cover, where floods can reach full peak in a matter of
minutes.  These factors make the identification and protection of
natural flood regulating regions vital to sustainable urban
development.

</div>
