---
layout: module

title: Recreation

module-specs-url: /modules/recspecs.html
---
<div id="module-intro" markdown="1">

![](/images/hikers_cropped.png)
{: .center }

Ecosystems provide settings for a hugely diverse array of recreational
activities. Recreational values are among the most well-recognized of
all ecosystem services by the public, and human preferences for
recreation have been well-studied by economists and other social
scientists. From a spatial perspective, we can map *sources* of
recreational value (areas capable of providing the natural setting
needed for a particular activity), *sinks* of recreational value
(landscape features that reduce those source values, if applicable),
*users* of a particular recreation area for a given activity, and the
*spatial flow* that connects users to specific recreational areas.

</div>

<div id="module-at-a-glance" markdown="1">

### At a glance
----------------

**Recreation:** The contribution of ecosystems toward providing
diverse outdoor recreational opportunities such as hiking, bird
watching, hunting, kayaking, etc.

**Viewsheds and recreation:** The benefit resulting from viewing
scenic landscapes, such as mountains or water bodies, which is carried
across lines of sight and is affected by obstructions or visual blight
in between viewers and scenic objects.  Viewshed quality is an
important component of the recreational experience for hikers and
visitors to scenic drives and overlooks.

**Biodiversity-based recreation (e.g. bird watching, wildlife viewing,
fishing, and hunting):** High diversity and the presence of rare birds
and wildlife (for birding and wildlife viewing) or habitat for
specific game species (for fishing and hunting) are prerequisites for
biodiversity-based recreational activities.

</div>

<div id="module-in-the-field" markdown="1">

### In the field
-----------------

#### Raven Ridge Preserve, Vermont

![](/images/vt_forest.jpg)
{: .left }

Quantifying relative viewshed quality at different viewpoints is being
used to help The Nature Conservancy manage for recreation use related
to views within Raven Ridge Preserve.

#### San Pedro River, Arizona

![](/images/san-pedro-leaves47a.jpg)
{: .left }

The San Pedro River, which flows north from Sonora into Arizona, is
internationally recognized for its high biodiversity and ecological
significance.  The Upper San Pedro draws birders from around the world
to view a broad array of resident and migratory species. *Photo
credit: R.Weller/Cochise College.*

[ ](/case_studies/sanpedro.html)
{: .learn-more }

</div>
