---
layout: module

title: Sediment regulation

module-specs-url: /modules/soilspecs.html
---
<div id="module-intro" markdown="1">

![](/images/800px-Rio_de_la_Plata_BA_2.jpg)
{: .center }

Erosion and sedimentation are major global problems that impose a high
cost on the functioning of ecosystems (e.g. aquatic, coastal, and
nearshore marine ecosystems) and economic sectors (e.g., agriculture,
water supply, electric power generation, and navigation). Natural
sediment delivery can also be a beneficial process.  For instance,
sediment pulses can restore fertility to floodplain farmland, and
reduced sediment delivery to deltas can lead to loss of coastal
wetlands and the critical services they provide.

</div>

<div id="module-at-a-glance" markdown="1">

### At a glance
----------------

**Sediment delivery as a beneficial or detrimental service:** Sediment
regulation can be classified as either a beneficial or detrimental
service, depending on whether the user benefits from or is harmed by
sediment delivery.  Running the sediment flow model allows the user to
map spatial connections between sources of sediment, areas that
promote sediment deposition, and users that benefit from or are harmed
by sediment delivery.  We can also run the erosion source model both
with and without existing vegetation, showing the benefit of existing
vegetation in erosion control or the benefits of increasing vegetation
cover on erosion-prone surfaces.

**Multiple benefits from sustainable forestry and agriculture:**
Because of the strong connections between areas of high biodiversity,
carbon storage, and erosion control, researchers in many regions are
exploring the overlap between areas that provide these services.
ARIES models can help the development of economic incentives for
forestry and agricultural practices that reduce erosion while
improving carbon sequestration and storage, biodiversity, and other
ecosystem services.

**Intelligent model selection:** Past ecosystem services modeling
projects have often relied on the Universal Soil Loss Equation or
Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation (USLE/RUSLE) to estimate erosion.
While RUSLE works well in certain environments, it has several
well-known limitations.  ARIES can use artificial intelligence to
select the right model for the right context: for instance, to use
RUSLE to estimate erosion loss in relatively level environments, and
to use data-driven Bayesian models to estimate erosion loss on
steeply-sloped environments where RUSLE is known to perform poorly.

</div>

<div id="module-in-the-field" markdown="1">

### In the field (click for more information)
-----------------

#### [Madagascar](/case_studies/madagascar.html)

![](/images/mg_stream.jpg)
{: .left }

Sedimentation is particularly problematic in Madagascar, where high
rates of deforestation and low natural rates of forest regrowth have
led to high levels of erosion. Excess sedimentation can be
particularly damaging to rice fields and to coastal and marine
ecosystems and the services they provide.

#### [Dominican Republic](/case_studies/dominicanrep.html)

![](/images/Dominican_Rep-NASA.jpg)
{: .left }

In the Dominican Republic, sediment loss from intensive agricultural
practices is impacting hydroelectric production in parts of the
country, impeding development efforts and reducing human
well-being. Mapping the costs and benefits of erosion can show the
added economic and environmental benefits of shade-grown coffee over
intensive agriculture.

#### [Chehalis River Basin, Washington](/case_studies/westernwa.html)

![](/images/SnoquamieForest.jpg)
{: .left }

In Western Washington, sedimentation is important for both providing
beneficial coarse sediments (e.g., gravels) for salmon spawning and
for avoided siltation of habitat for salmon and other economically
beneficial species. Sediment delivery can also have negative impacts
on drinking water intakes and recreational use and hydroelectric power
generation from reservoirs.

#### [Colorado](/case_studies/colorado.html)

![](/images/DillonReservoir.jpg)
{: .left }

Major fires in 1996 and 2002 led to sedimentation of several major
water supply reservoirs in Colorado, costing tens of millions of
dollars for dredging. The USDA Forest Service is working with local
water utilities to proactively manage forests surrounding major
drinking water reservoirs. Biophysical modeling of sedimentation and
its impacts could be used to help guide such management.

</div>
