---
layout: module

title: Freshwater supply

module-specs-url: /modules/waterspecs.html
---
<div id="module-intro" markdown="1">

![](/images/Elwha_River_-_Humes_Ranch_Area2.jpg)
{: .center title="Elwhajeff at en.wikipedia [CC-BY-SA-3.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0), CC-BY-SA-3.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0) or GFDL (www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html)], from Wikimedia Commons" }

Water supply is a critical ecosystem service, and the quantity,
quality, and timing of freshwater in surface water bodies and
groundwater are important factors in supporting human well-being.
While the role of ecosystems in protecting the quality, quantity, and
timing of freshwater flows has long been recognized, payments for
ecosystem services programs, particularly in the developing world, are
rapidly emerging to protect water supply sources for urban water
users.  We map the combined quantity, location, and timing of
freshwater flows to particular beneficiary groups (agriculture,
industry, domestic use).  This provides a clearer view of the
dependencies by various human beneficiaries on ecosystems for
freshwater.  We can also model water quality by accounting for spatial
flows of sediment, nutrients, or pathogens.

</div>

<div id="module-at-a-glance" markdown="1">

### At a glance
----------------

**Freshwater supply:** Surface and groundwater are closely connected
but move at different rates and based on different controlling
factors.  Sources of surface water include precipitation, snowmelt,
springs, baseflow to rivers, and incoming interbasin water
transfers. As water moves across the surface, it may be lost to
evapotranspiration or percolate into the soil to become groundwater.
Conversely, sources of groundwater include areas of infiltration or
artificial groundwater recharge.  Groundwater movement depends on
subsurface geology, and groundwater may eventually return to surface
water through springs or discharge of baseflow to rivers.

**Surface and groundwater users:** Given underlying data on the type
of use, user location, and quantity of water extracted from wells or
diverted from surface waters, we can show the contributing sources of
surface water for particular groups of users (e.g., domestic,
agricultural, industrial).  Different user groups may value water
differently, enabling ARIES users to explore potential tradeoffs and
efficiency gains in different water use and land management scenarios.

**Integrating hydrologic models:** Given the difficulty in developing
a generalized model of hydrologic processes that is applicable at
multiple spatial scales and in different ecological contexts, the
initial ARIES water supply models use direct data or Bayesian models
tailored to our case study regions but that account for influences on
hydrologic processes used by authors of past ecosystem services
modeling efforts.  In cases where vegetation-hydrology relationships
are poorly understood, such as in tropical forests, ARIES' data-driven
modeling approach may be more appropriate than using process-based
approaches.  In many other cases, second generation ARIES models will
link existing hydrologic models, improving model quality and
credibility. Ideally, ARIES would be capable of calling on several
hydrologic models, using artificial intelligence to select the correct
model for the spatial and temporal scale of analysis and for the
relevant ecosystem types.

</div>

<div id="module-in-the-field" markdown="1">

### In the field
-----------------

#### La Antigua River, Veracruz, Mexico

![La Antigua Photo by Jen Harrison-Cox](/images/veracruz-la_Antigua_075.jpg)
{: .left }

We developed ARIES water supply models for Mexico's La Antigua River
in the state of Veracruz.  These models account for water demand from
domestic, industrial, and agricultural users.  Model outputs quantify
the spatial connections between these users and the threatened cloud
forests in the upper watershed that supply much of the region's
water.

[ ](/case_studies/veracruz.html)
{: .learn-more }

#### San Pedro River, Arizona and Sonora, Mexico

![](/images/san_pedrokb2.jpg)
{: .left }

The San Pedro River, which flows north from Sonora into Arizona, is
internationally recognized for its high biodiversity and ecological
significance.  On the San Pedro, tradeoffs between human water use and
the groundwater and surface flow that support the San Pedro River's
riparian ecosystems are at the forefront of debates about population,
water use, and sustainability.

[ ](/case_studies/sanpedro.html)
{: .learn-more }

#### Colorado

![](/images/SouthPlatte.jpg)
{: .left }

Snowpack and runoff from the Rocky Mountains supplies drinking water
to millions of Coloradans and residents of ten downstream states in
the Southwest and Great Plains regions. These models can be used to
explore tradeoffs between water use among different sectors and how
changes in land use, public land management, and climate change impact
regional water supplies.

</div>