---
layout: master

title: ARtificial Intelligence for Ecosystem Services
---
<div id="homepage-sidebar" markdown="1">

<a class="launch-button"
   title="ARIES early preview, only for demonstration. Best seen with Firefox, Safari, or Google Chrome."
   onClick="window.open('http://ecoinformatics.uvm.edu/aries.app',
                        'ariesapp',
                        'toolbar=0,location=0,directories=0,status=0,menubar=0,scrollbars=0,resizable=0,width=1340,height=890');">
</a>

### Contact us

**Email:** [info@ariesonline.org](mailto:info@ariesonline.org?subject=ARIESOnline+Inquiry)

---------------------------

### Latest News

<script type="text/javascript" src="http://app.feed.informer.com/digest3/9R4K0CJXSS.js"> </script>

---------------------------

### Project sponsored by

[![National Science Foundation](/images/logos/nsf_logo.png)](http://www.nsf.gov)

[![United Nations Environment Programme World Conservation Monitoring Centre](/images/UNEP.jpg)](http://www.unep-wcmc.org)

[![University of Vermont](/images/logos/uvmlogo-words.gif)](http://www.uvm.edu/giee)

[![Conservation International](/images/logos/cilogo2.jpg)](http://www.conservation.org)

[![Earth Economics](/images/logos/EELogo_Tiny_jpg.jpg)](http://www.eartheconomics.org)

[![Basque Center for Climate Change](/images/logos/bc3logo_web.jpg)](http://www.bc3research.org)

[![Instituto de Ecologia](/images/INECOL.jpg)](http://www.ecologia.edu.mx)

</div>

<div id="homepage-content" markdown="1">

<iframe title="ARIES Video"
        type="text/html"
        frameborder="0"
        src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/5yHnUTPADMw?wmode=transparent"
        allowfullscreen="true">
</iframe>

ARIES redefines ecosystem services assessment and valuation in
decision-making. The ARIES approach to mapping benefits,
beneficiaries, and service flows is a powerful new way to visualize,
value, and manage the ecosystems on which the human economy and
well-being depend.
{: .large }

---------------------------

### A web-based technology

![](/images/interface.gif)
{: .left }

ARIES is a suite of applications, all delivered to end users through
the Web. All applications have been designed with the help of
professional usability engineers, and are accessible through a
standard web browser. Along with the main toolkit (Ecosystem Services
Explorer, Valuation Database, and Biodiversity Explorer), custom ARIES
interfaces can be built to simplify use by specific groups of end
users.

[ ](/intro.html)
{: .learn-more }

### Focus on conservation

![](/images/lemur_160.gif)
{: .left }

ARIES can help improve our understanding of the value to humans of
conserving high biodiversity areas. At the same time, it can help
conservation planning by identifying crucial areas to protect the flow
of ecosystem services to their beneficiaries. ARIES is being used in
Madagascar to plan conservation and enhance its value for local
communities.

### Focus on business

![](/images/oil_160.gif)
{: .left }

ARIES can help reduce impact and engender positive change by
prioritizing the conservation of ecosystem services flows to local
communities and locating critical flow areas to protect and enhance in
order to achieve positive offsetting of the consequences of
operations.  These applications can help businesses reduce liability,
maintain and improve a positive corporate image, and explore new
revenue streams.

</div>
