---
layout: case_study

title: La Antigua, Veracruz Case Study

primary_partner: <a href="http://www.ecologia.edu.mx/">Instituto de Ecologia, INECOL</a>

completed: March 2011

models: Water supply

maps: Source, sink, use, and flow maps for above ecosystem services

highlights: >
            Application of ARIES to a watershed for which high quality
            data and process-based hydrological models are available
            for integration in the ARIES system. Testing of ARIES'
            applicability for ecosystem services-based decision-making
            in a small watershed where payments for ecosystem services
            are in place.

partner_logo: <a href="http://www.ecologia.edu.mx/"><img alt="Instituto de Ecologia" src="images/INECOL.jpg" width="180" /></a>

case_study_image: <img src="images/veracruz_ramsar_site.jpg" alt="Veracruz Ramsar Site" />

case_study_intro: >
                  More than 72% of Veracruz's original forest has been
                  converted to pastureland and agriculture.  Still,
                  the remaining natural vegetation harbors high levels
                  of biodiversity. Forest fragmentation and land
                  conversion are now occurring in unique,
                  high-elevation montane cloud forest, one of the most
                  important land cover types for water provision in
                  the region. Water resources are under stress in the
                  basin and flooding is becoming increasingly
                  likely. This has led to unrest over water resources
                  between neighboring states and municipalities with
                  large population centers on their territory.
---
# Practical application
------------------------

A majority of people living in ten poor communities in the
predominantly forested Gavilanes watershed (located above the city of
Coatepec on the eastern slopes of Cofre de Perote volcano) derive
their livelihood from small-scale agricultural production, forestry,
ranching, and extraction of forest products. The area also provides
water to the city of Coatepec and agricultural users.  The conversion
of upstream forest to agriculture and ranching affects biodiversity
and hydrologic benefits for downstream beneficiaries. ARIES modeling
in La Antigua targets data and model development related to water
provision and regulation (e.g., land cover, land use management
practices, location of beneficiaries) to support conservation of such
benefits while maintaining production for the diverse economic sectors
in the region.

# Workshop
-----------

Two preliminary meetings in Xalapa, Mexico between INECOL faculty and
UVM/CI ARIES researchers were followed by a one-week training session
at UVM to preliminarily develop a water supply model. A subsequent
visit from INECOL personnel to UVM helped fine-tune the model and
provide data prior to the release of the first modeling results in
February 2011 to an audience of INECOL scientists and local
decision-makers.  The ecosystem service models rely on state of the
art data related to the hydrology of the montane cloud forest in the
region. State-funded monitoring projects have produced important
datasets relating hydrology to socio-economic benefits. This effort
integrates with ongoing work to assess ecosystem services in the
region conducted by Conservation International and its partners, with
the goal of identifying where natural resources management policies
could most strategically reduce deforestation and biodiversity loss.

<a href="http://www.eartheconomics.org/FileLibrary/file/Reports/Vera%20Cruz%20Attachments/Veracruz%20Agenda%20Espanol.pdf">
   February 17-18, 2011 (Xalapa,Veracruz): Assessment of Hydrological Service Flows in La Antigua Watershed
</a>
