---
layout: case_study

title: Colorado Case Study

case-study-image: <img src="/images/PeaksFromFlatirons.jpg" alt="View toward Roosevelt National Forest from The Flatirons, Boulder, Colorado" />

primary-partner: U.S. Geological Survey

completed: Fall 2012

models: Carbon sequestration and storage, water supply, aesthetic viewsheds, sediment regulation

maps: Source, sink, use, and flow maps for above ecosystem services

highlights: >
            Novel research on social-ecological hotspots mapping using
            ecosystem service flows derived from ARIES with social
            values mapping using SolVES.

partner-logo:
---
### Overview
-------------

Colorado's Rocky Mountains provide well-recognized benefits through
water supply to the Platte, Arkansas, Rio Grande, and Colorado Rivers
and recreational visits to millions of acres of National Forest and
National Park lands. Key management challenges include fire management
after almost a decade of fire suppression, outbreaks of mountain pine
beetle, which have killed large numbers of lodgepole and ponderosa
pines, resulting in changes to forest structure, and the impacts of
climate change on snowpack. By mapping ecosystem service provision and
beneficiaries, we can better illustrate management tradeoffs in these
charismatic ecosystems.

### Practical application
--------------------------

These models are designed to illustrate tradeoffs in pine beetle
management and in water use between different sectors of Colorado's
economy (agriculture and domestic use, plus water use by the
rapidly-growing hydrofracking industry). In addition, past work has
been conducted to map "social values" for ecosystem services -
spatially explicit survey information that shows places where people
directly value the landscape for certain cultural services (Sherrouse
et al. 2011). In this case study, we are conducting the first
"social-ecological hotspots mapping" (Alessa et al. 2008) exercise to
be based on modeled ecosystem service values and survey-based social
values for ecosystem services.

### Steps
----------

We adapted ARIES carbon sequestration and storage, aesthetic
viewsheds, sediment regulation, and water supply ecosystem services
models to account for locally-important ecological and socioeconomic
characteristics in Colorado. Past social values mapping using the
[Social Values for Ecosystem Services (SolVES) tool (Sherrouse et al.
2011)](http://solves.cr.usgs.gov/) has taken place on the Pike, San
Isabel, Arapahoe, Roosevelt, and Routt National Forests. We are
exploring spatial correlation and hotspots of modeled ecosystem
service provision and surveyed social values and the potential
management implications within hotspots and coldspots of ecosystem
services and social values.

### References
--------------

Alessa, L., A. Kliskey, and G. Brown. (2008) Social-ecological
hotspots mapping: A spatial approach for identifying coupled
social-ecological space. Landscape and Urban Planning 85: 27-39.

[Sherrouse B.C., J.M. Clement, and D.J. Semmens. (2011) A GIS
application for assessing, mapping, and quantifying the social values
of ecosystem services. Applied Geography 31:
748-760.](http://solves.cr.usgs.gov/)