---
layout: case_study

title: West Coyote Hills, Orange County Case Study

case-study-image: <img src="/images/CoyoteHillsCarbonUptake.jpg" alt="West Coyote Hills carbon sequestration map" />

primary-partner: Chevron Corporation

completed: August 2010

models: Carbon sequestration and storage, flood regulation

maps: Source, sink, use, and flow maps for above ecosystem services, modeled at the project site and watershed scales.

highlights: >
            Proof-of-concept for use of ARIES within an urban
            ecosystem at the project scale. Addresses gaps in the
            ecosystem services modeling literature that include
            accounting for multi-scalar flows, explicit uncertainty,
            data limitations, and spatial representation of
            beneficiaries. Uses real world data to illustrate the use
            of a quantitative ecosystem services framework for
            applications in land management, planning, and
            environmental value creation.

partner-logo:
---
# Overview
-----------

The forces of rapid urban expansion are causing a rise in demand for
urban ecosystem services. This swell in demand is also driving an
increase in their perceived value. Therefore, landowners, developers,
planners, and cities are keenly interested in how to best manage such
environmental assets. The West Coyote Hills property is typical of
this phenomenon, and establishes a proof-of-concept for the ARIES
approach using real world data at the project site scale (ca. 550
acres).

# Practical application
------------------------

A complete ARIES assessment of West Coyote Hills can help stakeholders
to elucidate how much the surrounding community benefits from the
natural functions of the property, in relation to other environmental
assets in the watershed. Furthermore, beneficiaries of the carbon
sequestration and flood regulation services can be located with
precision and the quantity of carbon sequestered and amount of flood
protection provided can be calculated and depicted
spatially. Moreover, the ARIES maps can help to inform development
siting, ecosystem service management, and different planning scenarios
can be tested to provide analysis of alternative management
approaches. Developers may also choose to use ARIES as a communication
tool to present community-based decisions that are firmly founded in
science.

# Steps
--------

The West Coyote Hills case study was completed in two phases. In the
first phase ecosystem services and their beneficiaries were
identified, from which carbon sequestration and storage and flood
regulation were selected for modeling with ARIES. Biophysical,
ecological, and socioeconomic spatial datasets were collected and
prepared for use with the ARIES system. In phase 2 models were built
for carbon sequestration and storage and flood regulation, accounting
for regional characteristics of southern California. Further
calibration of the models was performed based on preliminary
sensitivity analyses and data were integrated into the system for
model runs. Then, source, sink, use, and flow simulations were
performed resulting in spatial outputs. A total of 16 maps were
produced, each providing unique information about how the ecosystem
services are generated at West Coyote Hills and delivered to the end
users throughout the watershed and beyond.  We have not yet completed
a third phase, consisting of post hoc sensitivity analysis and
optimization techniques, which would yield actionable model outputs to
fully support local decision making.
