---
layout: case_study

title: Dominican Republic Case Study

case-study-image: <img src="/images/DR-Yaque.png" alt="Rio Yaque del Norte watershed" />

primary-partner: <a href="http://www.uvm.edu/">University of Vermont</a>

primary-researchers: Lee Gross, Nathaly Agosto Filion

completed: 2010

models: Sediment regulation

maps: Source, sink, use, and flow maps for above ecosystem services

partner-logo: <a href="http://www.uvm.edu/"><img alt="University of Vermont" src="/images/uvmlogo-words.gif" /></a>
---
### Overview
-------------

The Pico Duarte Coffee Region and surrounding Madre de Las Aguas
(Mother of Waters) Conservation Area are areas of critical ecological,
economic and social importance to the people of the Dominican
Republic. In recent years much attention has been paid to the
establishment of protected areas for the conservation of biodiversity
and ecosystem services. Despite these efforts, protected areas
represent less than five percent of this working agricultural
landscape traditionally in shade coffee. These shade coffee
poly-cultures play an essential role in ensuring ecosystem function to
conserve water resources, provide habitat for birds, and provide
consumptive resources to households.

### Local conditions
---------------------

Farmers recognize the role of their shade coffee in maintaining these
types of services, but have struggled to maintain their farms. As
across the tropics most Dominican coffee farmers are smallholders,
managing only 1-3 hectares of land. Farmers generally depend on family
members for labor, face a lack of access to land tenure, and live in a
constant state of poverty. Falling coffee prices, trade liberalization
and rising input costs have made life difficult for these small
farmers. Since 2002 these increased economic pressures have led to
significant changes in the landscape. More than half of small coffee
farms have agglomerated into larger farms of monoculture crops such as
chayote squash and beans and pasture for cattle.  Changes in the
landscape have resulted in environmental degradation threatening the
stability of this ecosystem to maintain function and provide services
at local, national and international levels.

### Practical application
--------------------------

In recent years, hydroelectric generation provided only 18% of the
Dominican Republic's total demand for electricity. Nearly all the
remaining demand was filled with expensive imported petroleum, diesel
oil and coal, leading to negative environmental impacts. Although the
Dominican Republic could produce more hydroelectric power,
sedimentation currently limits hydroelectric generation. Poor
agricultural practices typically lead to soil erosion, causing runoff
of sediment into rivers and reservoirs. Because of this sedimentation,
the Jimenoa hydroelectric power station must be cleaned every month,
which reduces its efficiency and profitability. More sustainable land
use patterns could facilitate growth in hydroelectric generation while
reducing energy costs for the country.
	  
ARIES provided a tool to demonstrate to decision makers how shade
coffee farms and other land management practices reduce erosion for
beneficiaries across the landscape. This tool equips local farmers,
organizations, companies purchasing agricultural products from the
region, conservation organizations, and government agencies with the
necessary information to make coordinated decisions that improve
overall landscape functionality with minimum levels of investment.

### Steps
----------

We adapted previously developed ARIES sediment regulation models for
use in the Dominican Republic by adding or removing locally important
influences on ecosystem service delivery for the region and through
incorporation of local spatial data, where available.  Model updates
were based on literature reviews and in-country field work by the
researchers involved.  ARIES currently contains an ad hoc erosion
model that can be used in places where deterministic equations like
the Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation (RUSLE) are inappropriate.
By combining different models in contextually appropriate ways, ARIES
is able to more realistically account for ecosystem service provision,
use, and flows.  We map farmland and reservoirs as beneficiaries of
sediment-free water.  By modeling the spatial connections between
beneficiaries and upstream ecosystems, we can better understand where
landscape interventions are likely to lead to reduced erosion or
increased sediment deposition before sediment reaches the region's
reservoirs.
