---
layout: case_study

title: Madagascar Case Study

case-study-image: <img src="/images/mg_rice_paddy.jpg" alt="Madagasacar rice paddy" />

primary-partner: <a href="http://www.conservation.org/">Conservation International</a>,
                 <a href="http://www.unep-wcmc.org">UNEP World Conservation Monitoring Centre</a>

completed: In progress

models: Carbon sequestration and storage, sediment regulation, subsistence fisheries, coastal flood regulation

maps: Source, sink, use, and flow maps for above ecosystem services

highlights: >
            Application of ARIES in a developing nation with high
            biodiversity and threats of deforestation.  Development
            and testing of flow models for marine ecosystem
            services. Potential to link terrestrial drivers of
            ecosystem service change (deforestation), changes in
            ecosystem service flows (sedimentation), and impacts to
            coastal ecosystems and the ecosystem services they
            generate.

partner-logo: <a href="http://www.conservation.org/"><img alt="Conservation International" src="/images/logos/cilogo2.jpg" /></a>
              <a href="http://www.unep-wcmc.org"><img alt="UNEP World Conservation Monitoring Centre" src="/images/UNEP.jpg" /></a>
---
# Overview
-----------

A global biodiversity hotspot, Madagascar suffers from high rates of
deforestation and poverty.  There has been great interest in targeting
incentives for conservation (e.g., carbon credit payments) in areas
that will preserve biodiversity and ecosystem services.  We initially
modeled carbon sequestration and storage and sediment regulation
services from forests in Madagascar, and especially their benefits for
downstream rice farmers in providing sediment-free water.  ARIES'
initial marine ecosystem services models also developed for
Madagascar, focusing on coastal storm regulation and subsistence
fisheries.  Both of these services are critical for Madagascar, due to
its reliance on fisheries for protein and its susceptibility to
tropical storms forming in the southwest Indian Ocean.  When ARIES'
terrestrial and marine ecosystem service flow models are linked, they
will provide an unprecedented view of the connections between human
well-being and linked marine and terrestrial ecosystems.

# Steps
--------

The Madagascar ecosystem services models primarily run on global
terrestrial and marine datasets, supplemented by local data assembled
by ARIES partners at Conservation International who have previously
worked on ecosystem services.  Based on Wendland et al.'s (2010) work
on manually mapping ecosystem services in Madagascar as well as a
literature review and discussions with experts, we developed
probabilistic models of ecosystem service provision, use, and flows
for carbon and sediment Madagascar.  Based on a workshop conducted by
UNEP-WCMC to discuss mapping and modeling marine ecosystem service
flows, we assembled data and constructed models for subsistence
fisheries and coastal storm regulation in Madagascar.  With completion
of ecosystem service flow models as part of ARIES' 2011 beta release,
we are now positioned to develop linked marine-terrestrial ecosystem
service flow models for Madagascar, which can then be extended and
tested in other coastal and marine environments.

# Reference
------------

[Wendland, K.J., M. Honzak, R. Portela, B. Vitale, S. Rubinoff, and
J. Randrianarisoa. 2010. Targeting and implementing payments for
ecosystem services: Opportunities for bundling biodiversity
conservation with carbon and water services in Madagascar. Ecological
Economics 69:2093-2107.](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921800909000044)
