---
layout: case_study

title: San Pedro River Case Study

case-study-image: <img src="/images/sanpedromap.jpg" alt="San Pedro watershed map" />

primary-partner: U.S. Geological Survey, Bureau of Land Management

completed: Summer 2011

models: Carbon sequestration and storage, water supply, aesthetic viewsheds, open space proximity, recreation

maps: Source, sink, use, and flow maps for above ecosystem services

highlights: >
            Application of ARIES to a binational watershed of high
            conservation significance in an arid/semiarid
            region. Testing of ARIES' applicability for ecosystem
            services-based decision-making for federal land management
            agencies.

partner-logo:
---
### Overview
-------------

The San Pedro River, which flows north from Sonora into Arizona, is
internationally recognized for its high biodiversity and ecological
significance. A long history of scientific research in the watershed
exists to support ecosystem services research on the watershed.

### Practical application
--------------------------

Much of the Upper San Pedro River's riparian corridor is managed by
the Bureau of Land Management (BLM)'s San Pedro Riparian National
Conservation Area, yet the perennial flow supporting these reaches is
threatened by groundwater withdrawals. The project site was chosen as
a test case to evaluate alternative ecosystem services modeling and
valuation tools for the BLM, and included an evaluation of ARIES
models. Ideally ecosystem services assessments could thus inform
decision making for the BLM in the San Pedro watershed and
agency-wide, as well as for other federal agencies responsible for
public land management.

### Steps
----------

An initial stakeholder meeting was held to prioritize ecosystem
services for analysis. These included water, carbon, biodiversity, and
cultural services.  From this list, we developed a list of concrete
beneficiary groups for mapping and valuation. For example, we
identified water for agriculture, mining, domestic use, and the
military as separate beneficiary groups. We built models to identify
areas that provide ecosystem services (sources), locate beneficiaries
on the landscape (uses), and identify "sink" features that
biophysically alter ecosystem services flows. Agent-based flow models
then link beneficiaries to ecosystems providing the services, showing
the strength of dependencies on ecosystem services and opportunities
to protect or improve ecosystem service flows. This work has also
included iterative model reviews with experts to improve the quality
of the data sources, models, and outputs and with decision makers to
improve the usefulness of outputs for decision making. Completion of
this project is set for Summer 2011, and will include the release of a
publicly available USGS Scientific Investigations Report detailing the
strengths and limitations of alternative ecosystem services valuation
and modeling tools.
