---
layout: case_study

title: Vermont Case Study

case-study-image: <img src="/images/vt_forest.jpg" alt="Forested landscape in northern New England" />

primary-partner: <a href="http://www.uvm.edu/">University of Vermont</a>

primary-researchers: Sam Gorton, Rose Graves, Jennifer Wright

completed: May 2010

models: <a href="/modules/carbon.html">Carbon sequestration and storage</a>, <a href="/modules/rec.html">recreational viewsheds</a>

partner-logo: <a href="http://www.uvm.edu/"><img alt="University of Vermont" src="/images/uvmlogo-words.gif" /></a>
---
### Overview
-------------

In northern New England, a century of forest regrowth following
intensive agricultural clearance has led to a landscape dominated
small- to medium-scale agriculture and second-growth forests.  These
forests provide numerous recreational opportunities, provide
employment in the forestry and forest products industries, sequester
and store carbon, and provide various other ecosystem services.
Within the region's agricultural and forest communities, there is
increasing interest in managing both forests and farmland to increase
carbon sequestration and storage and absorb nutrients from waterways.
Developing payments for ecosystem services (PES) programs like the
Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) and other local policies
could support these efforts, but would benefit from emerging ecosystem
service models to map and quantify ecosystem services under different
management alternatives.

### Practical application: Carbon sequestration and storage
------------------------------------------------------------

Preliminary models of carbon sequestration and storage were developed
to assess the sequestration and storage potential of the mixed
agricultural and forested landscapes in Vermont. Spatial data for
soil, climate, and vegetation characteristics was coupled with prior
information on land management techniques to quantify stocks and flows
in terrestrial carbon pools. In addition to describing existing carbon
sequestration and storage levels, this model could also be used to
explore how different land management activities might affect carbon
uptake.  If through application of novel ecosystem service models,
rural working landscapes can be shown to provide substantial carbon
uptake potential, this provides motivation for the development of
multifunctional agricultural landscapes. Such landscapes might
simultaneously sequester carbon (and nutrients) while providing food
and energy products for market, demonstrating the role that human
managed landscapes play in supplying diverse economic and ecological
goods and services.

### Practical application: Scenic viewsheds
--------------------------------------------

This project focused on viewshed values associated with viewpoints
located within a newly created Nature Conservancy Preserve in the
Chittenden County, Vermont.  This 366-acre preserve, Raven Ridge, is
located in the towns of Monkton, Charlotte, and Hinesburg. Trails
located on the property lead to bedrock outcroppings that afford views
over the Champlain Valley and the Adirondacks as well as viewpoints
located along Lewis Creek and looking west toward the Green
Mountains. Understanding the relative view source values for each
viewpoint can help The Nature Conservancy manage for recreation use
related to views within Raven Ridge Preserve.  While originally
established for an area with relatively small scope (the Raven Ridge
Preserve), this model could be expanded and applied more broadly to
the Northern Forest region of northeastern United States, particularly
the Adirondacks, Vermont, New Hampshire, and Maine.

### Steps
----------

Following past ecosystem services modeling approaches "causal webs" of
factors affecting carbon dynamics in agricultural and forest soils and
vegetation were developed. Factors for calculating carbon
sequestration provision were derived from a literature review and from
available GIS data for climate, soils, and vegetation. The results are
a set of preliminary carbon sequestration and storage models for
agricultural and forest landscapes in Vermont.

Past spatial ecosystem service models of terrestrial (i.e. within
vegetation and soils) carbon sequestration have focused on forest
biomass carbon uptake. However, researchers have also noted the
potential for diverse, holistically managed agricultural landscapes to
sequester carbon in vegetative biomass as well as soils. Farms of the
northeastern United States are diverse landscapes incorporating row
crops, grasslands, wetlands and woodlots, which might be managed for
both soil and vegetative carbon sequestration. This research seeks to
quantify the role that these diverse farm landscapes can play in
terrestrial carbon sequestration through the application of Bayesian
network models.

A similar process was followed to map viewshed quality and use, based
on sources of aesthetically valuable views including mountains, water
bodies, and a heterogeneous pattern of land cover representing both
forested and agricultural lands.  Recreational users of aesthetic
views are those people that access view points along trails or at
scenic vistas.  As a view travels from source to user, it may be
physically blocked by buildings, trees, or topography.  Its quality
may be depleted by air pollution or visual blight, such as highways,
forest clearcuts, or visually unappealing land use types like
commercial, industrial, or transportation uses.  Such sources of
visual blight can also be mapped using source, sink, use and flow
models for viewsheds.
