---
layout: case_study

title: Western Washington Case Study

case-study-image: <img src="/images/chehalis.jpg" alt="Chehalis River Basin" />

primary-partner: <a href="http://www.eartheconomics.org/">Earth Economics</a>

completed: Summer 2011

models: <a href="/modules/flood.html">Flood regulation</a>, <a href="/modules/carbon.html">carbon sequestration and storage</a>, <a href="/modules/soil.html">sediment regulation</a>, <a href="/modules/aesth.html">aesthetic viewsheds</a>, <a href="/modules/aesth.html">open space proximity</a>

maps: Source, sink, use, and flow maps for above ecosystem services

highlights: First use of ARIES flood regulation prototype

lessons-learned: >
                 Inadequate data to create accurate hydrologic models
                 resulted in only preliminary maps as of early 2010.
                 Full sets of source, sink, use, and flow maps were
                 available by Summer 2011, enabling full comparison of
                 ecosystem services tradeoffs.

partner-logo: <a href="http://www.eartheconomics.org/"><img alt="Earth Economics" src="/images/EELogo_Tiny_jpg.jpg" /></a>
---
### Overview
-------------

ARIES is built on basic science and our understanding of how natural
systems work. The better the data on hydrology, topography, soils, and
other determining factors are, the better ARIES can perform. Ecosystem
services (ES), such as flood regulation depend on the interaction
between natural systems and people. With this in mind, ARIES relies on
four types of models, based on GIS and other data: 1) Beneficiary
models; 2) Provisioning models; 3) Sink models and 4) Flow
models. Initial ARIES mapping and results for the Chehalis River Basin
excluded external hydrologic models but utilized locally-relevant GIS
data and ad hoc models. Mapping and understanding the beneficiaries,
provisioning and spatial flows of floodwater also sets in place the
basis for a funding mechanism that can be developed for the Flood
Authority.

### Practical application
--------------------------

ARIES allowed a fully integrated approach to flood protection,
utilizing extensive information from geographic information system
mapping and data and will have the capacity to run and test different
hydrologic models. River and stream flow and the flood level estimates
will be provided with a hydrologic model and based on slope, rainfall,
infiltration, impermeable surfaces, snow, temperature, levees,
bridges, dams, and other data derived from each subbasin. This will
provide water elevation data in each subwatersheds, flood flows and
enable simulation of flood protection options, including an analysis
of tradeoffs with other co-benefit ecosystem services.

### Steps
----------

In the case of the Chehalis River Basin and flood protection, local
GIS data was first gathered and integrated into the ARIES GeoServer,
which automates the data handling process.  Next, preliminary
conceptual models for each of the beneficiary, provision and sink
region were constructed. Future development of these models will
entail closer collaboration with local stakeholders to integrate
preexisting hydrologic models. The final maps produced represent
preliminary estimates of beneficiary locations and flood
protection. Further work to test and integrate external models will
improve the accuracy and policy relevance of these ARIES model
outputs.

### Modeling flood scenarios
-----------------------------

The ARIES team is currently developing scenario analysis with actual
data from the Chehalis River Basin. A discussion of this planned
scenario generation tool follows.

One strength of the ARIES technology is the simultaneous mapping of
benefits resulting from ecosystem services, the beneficiaries that
receive them, and the flows of water, matter, energy or information
that connect benefits or damages to beneficiaries.  Because of the
mapping of flows, ARIES will be capable of estimating not only the
potential provision of ecosystem services, such as flood protection,
but also levels of value or damage provided to specific beneficiary
groups.

A work session in the Chehalis River Basin, running an ARIES flood
scenario analysis would proceed as follows:

1. An operator would select the area of interest, e.g. the upper
   Chehalis watershed and initiate a baseline ecosystem services flow
   analysis. This would search the database for locally relevant
   models and GIS data to populate the source, sink, and use models.
   These models and the flow model are then run to provide estimates
   of baseline conditions for actual ecosystem service delivery.

2. The baseline scenario is defined by the in terms of precipitation
   events, level of ground water saturation and other inputs, and in
   terms of actions or policies to be simulated on the landscape
   (e.g. land use changes, construction or removal of levees, etc.).
   After the baseline and future scenarios have been defined, the
   model is run. Parameters can include a default hydrologic model
   developed within ARIES, or, eventually, any desired hydrologic
   model, which can be "bolted onto" ARIES. Thus, ARIES will be able
   to use different hydrologic models for scenarios under different
   model applications.

3. The product of flow analysis is a set of maps that detail the
   quantity of floodwater that moves across the landscape and either
   reaches people or property or is intercepted and diverted. The
   model could compare scenarios with changes in land use patterns,
   elevated structures, increased forest cover, greater permeability
   to groundwater, construction or removal of dams, levees, roads,
   bridges, or other potential scenarios.

4. Because ARIES models individual beneficiaries it can compute the
   precise areas of flood protection provisioning or source flood
   waters that affect them. In this way, the fine-grained effects of
   policy or global changes can be studied with scenarios, both
   overall and on a location-specific basis.

5. Because ARIES computes other terrestrial ecosystem services besides
   flood protection (carbon sequestration and storage, water supply,
   sediment regulation, aesthetics, recreation), the overall value of
   each scenario can also be compared at a glance showing the
   influence on other ecosystem services and their beneficiaries.

6. ARIES also computes not only the provision of each ES, but also the
   fraction of benefits that actually reach beneficiaries (and the
   explicit spatial routing of this provision), the efficiency of
   provision (the ratio of the potential benefit that is actually
   used) can be calculated under each scenario. This can then be
   compared to other flood protection investments, or any combination
   of flood protection investments to show how much benefit was
   received by which beneficiaries across the landscape and how
   efficient or co-dependent each investment was in providing these
   benefits. These benefits could be measured as fewer residences
   flooded, less economic damage, lowered flood water elevations,
   fewer people and economic assets in the floodplain and in danger of
   flooding.

7. In addition, ARIES provides measures of uncertainty. Though two
   forest areas or structures may be identified as providing flood
   protection the levels of certainty in provisioning may be
   different. Uncertainty can be shown as data or mapped.

A scenario generator will change the model parameters based on user
inputs for different actions in subwatersheds such as construction or
removal of a levee, dam, or elevated structures, land use changes or
increased retention from wetland restoration or other flood protection
actions. These scenarios can be combined with different rainfall and
flood source scenarios to provide a variety of flood scenario
combinations. With this, the Flood Authority or other users can test
the robustness of one flood action with different rainfall,
temperature, snow, groundwater saturation states.


### References
--------------

[Bagstad, K.J., D. Semmens, R. Winthrop, D. Jaworski, and J. Larson. 2012. Ecosystem services valuation to support decisionmaking on public lands-A case study of the San Pedro River Watershed, Arizona. USGS Scientific Investigations Report 2012-5251.](http://pubs.usgs.gov/sir/2012/5251/)

[Bagstad, K.J., G.W. Johnson, B. Voigt, and F. Villa. 2013. Spatial dynamics of ecosystem service flows: A comprehensive approach to quantifying actual services. Ecosystem Services 4: 117-125.](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212041612000174)

[Bagstad, K.J., D.J. Semmens, and R. Winthrop. 2013. Comparing approaches to spatially explicit ecosystem service modeling: A case study from the San Pedro River, Arizona. Ecosystem Services 5: 40-50.](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/22120416)

-------------------------------------------

Please contact Earth Economics with your questions and feedback.

**Email:** <info@eartheconomics.org>

**Phone:** +1 (253) 539-4801

Click [HERE](http://www.eartheconomics.org/Page12.aspx) for a full
report on the ARIES application to flood regulation in the Chehalis
River Basin.
