---
layout: master

title: The ARIES Team
---
# The ARIES team

<div id="ariesteam-sidebar" markdown="1">

## Collaboratory Partners
--------------------------

[![United Nations Environment Programme World Conservation Monitoring Centre](/images/UNEP.jpg)](http://www.unep-wcmc.org)

[![University of Vermont](/images/logos/uvmlogo-words.gif)](http://www.uvm.edu/giee)

[![Conservation International](/images/logos/cilogo2.jpg)](http://www.conservation.org)

[![Earth Economics](/images/logos/EELogo_Tiny_jpg.jpg)](http://www.eartheconomics.org)

[![Basque Center for Climate Change](/images/logos/bc3logo_web.jpg)](http://www.bc3research.org)

[![Instituto de Ecologia](/images/INECOL.jpg)](http://www.ecologia.edu.mx)

</div>

<div id="ariesteam-content" markdown="1">

### Overview
-------------

ARIES was developed with funding from the National Science Foundation
at the University of Vermont's Gund Institute for Ecological
Economics. The partner organizations and individuals lishted here have
worked together to develop ARIES' online infrastructure, data and
model archives, and case study applications.

### Ferdinando Villa
---------------------

**Ferdinando Villa, Principal Investigator.** Ferdinando holds a
Ph.D. in theoretical Ecology and had a long parallel career as a
scientific software designer and engineer. After working in many
fields of Ecology, from theoretical Island Biogeography to
spatially-explicit Decision Analysis, he joined the Gund Institute for
Ecological Economics at the University of Vermont. He has since
expanded the focus of his research to the interface of policy, ecology
and economics, concentrating on artificial intelligence approaches to
assist environmental decision making and natural system assessment and
valuation. Dr. Villa currently leads the ARIES project (Artificial
Intelligence for Ecosystem Services which is producing a
next-generation web application meant to make environmental decisions
easier and more effective. Along with ARIES, Dr. Villa collaborates
with many other projects including the Long Term Ecosystem Research
project and the SEAMLESS (System for Environmental and Agricultural
Modeling; Linking European Science and Society project, financed by
the EU. His research on high-performance computer simulation and
mathematical modeling applied to community and ecosystem ecology
earned him collaborations with UNESCO, the European Union, the Italian
Ministry of the Environment and several international organizations
such as the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC) in
Fiji. He has collaborated with international institutions and
governments on environmental assessment methods, and continues to do
research in basic ecology, protected areas planning, and related
fields. He is the author or coauthor of 110+ scientific publications
and a number of major open source software packages. He has been the
recipient of several million USD in grants from both the US National
Science Foundation and the European Union, to develop tools for
decision makers that integrate the best science with automated,
AI-assisted decision tools. Ferdinando currently works at the Basque
Center for Climate Change and can be reached
at <ferdinando.villa@bc3research.org>

### Brian Voigt
----------------

Brian Voigt is a Post-doctoral Fellow at the Rubenstein School for the
Environment and Natural Resources at the University of Vermont. His
interests focus on developing and applying computer based systems for
modeling land use conversion and urban sprawl. Brian has applied an
urban growth simulation model (UrbanSim) to central Vermont to explore
changes to the landscape and test land use policy options for guiding
future development. Brian has a B.A. in Mathematics and Sociology from
Miami University and a Master's degree in City and Regional Planning
from Clemson University.  Prior to enrolling at UVM, Brian also worked
for 6 years at the Washington State Department of Ecology as the
Coastal Planner for the Southwest Washington Coastal Erosion Study
Brian can be reached at <bvoigt@uvm.edu>

### David Batker
-----------------

Dave Batker completed his graduate training in economics under Herman
Daly, one of the world's foremost ecological economists. Dave has
taught in the Training Department of the World Bank, and has worked
for Greenpeace International, specializing in trade and international
finance. He also worked for two years with the Rural Reconstruction
Movement, a Philippine non-profit group dedicated to ecologically
sound community-based development. In 1998, Dave founded the Earth
Economics, a non-profit that applies ecological economics to land use
planning and policy around the globe. Dave can be reached
at <dbatker@eartheconomics.org>

### Gary Johnson
-----------------

Gary Johnson is a Ph.D.  candidate in Computer Science at the
University of Vermont. He graduated summa cum laude from Marlboro
College in 2005 with his B.S.  in Computer Science/Geoinformatics upon
the completion of a self-designed program of study focusing on the
development and application of Open Source software for landscape
mapping and wildlife monitoring. He currently works as a research
assistant at the Gund Institute's Ecoinformatics Collaboratory, where
he is one of the primary technical developers of the NSF-funded ARIES
(ARtificial Intelligence for Ecosystem Services) project. His research
interests include neural and evolutionary computation, knowledge
representation and reasoning under uncertainty, decision theory,
statistical modeling, functional programming, and pattern
classification. Gary can be reached at <gwjohnso@uvm.edu>

### Jennifer Harrison-Cox
--------------------------

Jen Harrison-Cox brings over 15 years of project and people management
expertise to Earth Economics projects. Her professional background is
software engineering where she has held the roles of Principal Program
Manager, Lead Project Manager and Operations Manager. In 2010,
Jennifer lead the team to complete the Chehalis case study for
ARIES. Jennifer also serves as the Executive Director of Partnership
for Rural King County (<http://www.prkc.org>), a grassroots
organization focused on the long term sustainability and viability of
rural eastern King County, Washington. Jen can be reached at
<jcox@eartheconomics.org>

### Kenneth Bagstad
--------------------

Ken Bagstad is a Mendenhall Postdoctoral Fellow and research economist
working with the U.S. Geological Survey's Rocky Mountain Geographic
Science Center in Denver.  For this work, he uses GIS and modeling to
map and value ecosystem service flows at several sites in the Western
United States.  He has previously worked with the Bureau of Land
Management on testing alternative ecosystem services tools, including
the ARIES and InVEST models, for their value in decision-making for
public land management.  Ken has also led the development of source,
sink, and use models and spatial data management for the ARIES project
to support web-based mapping, quantification, and valuation ecosystem
services for environmental decision-making. Ken received his
Ph.D. from the University of Vermont, M.S. from Arizona State
University, and B.A. from Ohio Wesleyan University. He can be reached
at <kjbagstad@usgs.gov>

### Marta Ceroni
-----------------

Marta Ceroni is a research professor at the Gund Institute for
Ecological Economics, University of Vermont with interests in
biodiversity and ecosystem services in natural and managed
systems. She holds a Ph.D. in ecology from the University of Parma,
Italy. Her current work includes field assessments and valuations of
ecosystem services for conservation with a special interest in
countries with transitioning economies (e.g. Eastern Europe). She is
also involved in the documentation and formalization of ecosystem
service knowledge for use in public access databases and the study of
policy mechanisms for sustainable forest management. She teaches
ethnobotany from an ecological economic perspective in the Honors
College at the UVM. Marta can be reached at
<mceroni@uvm.edu>

### Maya Kocian
----------------

Maya Kocian graduated from Pacific Lutheran University with a
Bachelor's degree in Economics. During her years at PLU she studied
abroad in both Latin America and Europe. In 2006 Maya joined Earth
Economics as a research analyst. She has contributed to several
projects including a determination of the potential effects of oil
drilling in the Yasuni National Park, a pristine environment of the
Ecuadorian Amazon. While in Ecuador, she produced and designed briefs
used by the Ecuadorian delegation at the 2007 United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. Maya has participated in countless
local, national and international workshops and conferences on the
application of ecological economics. Maya can be reached
at <mkocian@eartheconomics.org>

### Miroslav Honzak
--------------------

Miroslav Honzak is the Senior Advisor of the Global Change and
Ecosystem Services Program at Conservation International. He has a
wide-range of experience in the field of Remote Sensing and Geographic
Information Systems with a focus on monitoring and measuring of forest
resources, socio-economic analyses and more recently on modeling
scenarios of viable conservation corridors and mapping and valuating
of ecosystem services and hydrological modeling. Miro can be reached
at <m.honzak@conservation.org>

### Octavio Perez-Maqueo
-------------------------

Octavio Perez-Maqueo received his Ph.D.  degree from the Instituto de
Ecologia, A.C. in Mexico where he presently works as a researcher. He
teaches within the INECOL postgraduate program and has participated in
more than twenty environmental studies courses conducted for both the
private and public sector. He did a post-doctoral stay at the Gund
Institute where he worked on the importance of coast and on the
valuation of coastal wetlands for hurricane protection. His current
interest includes understanding the relationship between social and
ecological systems and applies this knowledge for the benefit of local
people by involving researches and decision makers. Octavio can be
reached at <octavio.maqueo@inecol.edu.mx>

### Rosimeiry Portela
----------------------

Rosimeiry Portela is an Ecological Economist/Senior Director for the
Science and Knowledge at Conservation International
(CI). Dr. Portela's research focus primarily on improving the
understanding of the linkages between biodiversity conservation, and
the provision of ecosystem services (ES). She leads a team of
researchers working on a variety of biophysical and economics modeling
techniques to estimate provision, benefits and values of ecosystem
services at multiple scales, working across several CI divisions,
field offices and other research partners on terrestrial and marine
biomes. Elements of Rosimeiry's work include: spatial assessment and
valuation of ES provision; supporting development of ARIES; supporting
development of the scientific framework, providing policy
recommendations, and compiling ecosystem services values for TEEB -
The Economics of Ecosystem and Biodiversity.

Rosimeiry has extensive experience with natural resources management
in the Brazilian southern Amazon. She has a Master's degree from the
University of Florida, Gainesville and a Ph.D. from the University of
Maryland, College Park. Rosimeiry also worked for the World Bank
Institute to advance understanding of how market mechanisms can be
used to conserve biodiversity and ES provision while maintaining
sustainable livelihoods.  Rosimeiry can be reached at
<r.portela@conservation.org>

</div>
