---
layout: master

title: Introduction to ARIES
---
# Introduction to ARIES

<div id="about-sidebar" markdown="1">

## At a glance
---------------

### Ecosystem services

Ecosystem services (ES) are the economic benefits provided by nature
to humans. ES can be used to frame tradeoffs in conservation and
economic development. Examples of ecosystem services include water
supply, flood and coastal storm regulation, nutrient regulation and
carbon sequestration and storage.

### Development background

ARIES is a federally funded project aiming to provide intelligent
support to Ecosystem Service Assessment and Valuation (ESAV); it
started on April 1, 2007 thanks to a $925,000 grant from the National
Science Foundation to the Ecoinformatics Collaboratory at University
of Vermont, Earth Economics, and Conservation International.  Partners
from Madagascar to Puget Sound are providing case studies, data and
knowledge to inform the ARIES algorithms.  Demonstration,
proof-of-concept, and test releases were made available starting in
summer 2008. A fully functional portal will be available to the public
by the spring of 2012.

### How it works

ARIES encodes relevant ecological and socioeconomic knowledge to map
ES provision, use, and benefit flows - all of which are built
according to our latest understanding of ecosystem services. This is
done through an automated data integration process utilizing an
extensive database featuring global through local scale GIS data and
ecosystem service models.

</div>

<div id="about-content" markdown="1">

### Overview
-------------

**ARIES** is a web-based technology offered to users worldwide to
assist rapid ecosystem service assessment and valuation (ESAV). Its
purpose is to make environmental decision making easier and more
effective. ARIES helps users discover, understand, and quantify
environmental assets and the factors influencing their values, for
specific geographic areas and based on user needs and priorities.

ARIES follows the open source software paradigm; our goal is to have
unsupervised access to ARIES services open and free for all non-profit
users, including members of NGOs, academic, or governmental
institutions. Non-profit users commit to sharing data in ways that
best reflect their mission and sources, contributing to the growth of
the system over time. Access to ARIES for business and consulting
groups will also be made available through consortium members, whose
proceeds will support the maintenance and growth of the system.

<div id="about-consortium" markdown="1">

### ARIES Consortium members
-----------------------------

[![Basque Center for Climate Change](/images/bc3logo_web.jpg)](http://www.bc3research.org)

[![Instituto de Ecologia](/images/INECOL.jpg)](http://www.ecologia.edu.mx)

[![United Nations Environment Programme World Conservation Monitoring Centre](/images/UNEP.jpg)](http://www.unep-wcmc.org)

[![University of Vermont](/images/uvmlogo-words.gif)](http://www.uvm.edu/giee)

[![Conservation International](/images/cilogo2.jpg)](http://www.conservation.org)

[![Earth Economics](/images/EELogo_Tiny_jpg.jpg)](http://www.eartheconomics.org)

</div>

<div id="about-contact" markdown="1">

**Please contact us with your questions and feedback.**

**Email:** [info@ariesonline.org](mailto:info@ariesonline.org?subject=ARIESOnline+Inquiry)

</div>

</div>
